Algorithmic methods
===================

There are three calculations to accomplish in order to obtain all the
parameters necessary to write the circuit Hamiltonian. We need:

-   the eigen-frequencies $\omega_m$ and loss rates $\kappa_m$
    fulfilling $Y_r(\zeta_m=\omega_m+i\kappa_m/2) = 0$ where $Y_r$ is
    the admittance across a reference junction

-   the derivative of this admittance evaluated at $\zeta_m$

-   the transfer functions $T_{jr}$ between junctions $j$ and the
    reference junction $r$

In this section, we cover the algorithmic methods used to calculate
these three quantities

Resonance frequency and dissipation rate {#sec:methods_resonance_frequency}
----------------------------------------

### Theoretical background

In order to obtain an expression for the admittance across the reference
junction, we start by writing the set of equations governing the physics
of the circuit. We first determine a list of nodes, which are points at
which circuit components connect. Each node, labeled $n$, is assigned a
voltage $v_n$. We name $r_\pm$ the positive and negative nodes of the
reference junction.

We are interested in the steady-state oscillatory behavior of the
system. We can thus move to the frequency domain, with complex node
voltages $|V_n(\omega)| e^{i(\omega t+\theta(V_n(\omega_n)))}$, fully
described by their phasors, the complex numbers
$V_n = |V_n(\omega)| e^{i\theta(V_n(\omega_n))}$. In this mathematical
construct, the real-part of the complex voltages describes the voltage
one would measure at the node in reality. Current conservation dictates
that the sum of all currents arriving at any node $n$, from the other
nodes $k$ of the circuit should be equal to the oscillatory current
injected at node $n$ by a hypothetical, infinite impedance current
source. This current is also characterized by a phasor $I_n$. This can
be compactly written as $$\sum_{k\ne n} G_{nk}(V_n-V_k) = I_n
    \label{eq:kirchhoff_1}$$ where $k$ label the other nodes of the
circuit and $G_{nk}$ is the conductance directly connecting nodes $k$
and $n$. Note that in this notation, if a node $k_1$ can only reach node
$n$ through another node $k_2$, then $G_{nk_1} = 0$. Inductors (with
inductance $L$), capacitors (with capacitance $C$) and resistors (with
resistance $R$) then have conductances $1/iL\omega$, $iC\omega$ and
$1/R$ respectively.

Expanding
Eq. [\[eq:kirchhoff\_1\]](#eq:kirchhoff_1){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:kirchhoff_1"} yields
$$(\sum_{k\ne n} G_{nk})V_n-\sum_{k\ne n} G_{nk}V_k = I_n
    \label{eq:kirchhoff_1}$$ which can be written in matrix form as
$$\begin{pmatrix}
    \Sigma_{k\ne 0}G_{0k} &-G_{01}  &\cdots  &-G_{0N} \\ 
    -G_{10} &\Sigma_{k\ne 1}G_{1k} &\cdots  &-G_{1N} \\ 
    \vdots &\vdots  &\ddots  & \vdots\\ 
    -G_{N0} &-G_{N1}  &\cdots  &\Sigma_{k\ne N}G_{Nk} 
    \end{pmatrix}
    \begin{pmatrix}
    V_0\\ 
    V_1\\ 
    \vdots\\ 
    V_N
    \end{pmatrix}=
    \begin{pmatrix}
    I_0\\ 
    I_1\\ 
    \vdots\\ 
    I_N
    \end{pmatrix}
    \label{eq:conductance_matrix_no_ground}$$ Since voltage is the
electric potential of a node relative to another, we still have the
freedom of choosing a ground node. Equivalently, conservation of
currents imposes that current exciting that node is equal to the sum of
currents entering the others, there is thus a redundant degree of
freedom in
Eq.([\[eq:conductance\_matrix\_no\_ground\]](#eq:conductance_matrix_no_ground){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:conductance_matrix_no_ground"}). For simplicity, we will
choose node 0 as ground. Since we are only interested in the admittance
across the reference junction, we set all currents to zero, except the
currents entering the positive and negative reference junction nodes:
$I_{r_+}$ and $I_{r_-} = -I_{r_+}$ respectively. The admittance is
defined by $Y_r = I_{r_+}/(V_{r_+}-V_{r_-})$. The equations then reduce
to $$\mathbf{G}\begin{pmatrix}
    V_1\\ 
    V_2\\ 
    \vdots\\ 
    V_N
    \end{pmatrix}=Y_r
    \begin{pmatrix}
    \vdots\\ 
    0\\ 
    V_{r_+}-V_{r_-}\\ 
    0\\
    \vdots\\ 
    0\\ 
    V_{r_-}-V_{r_+}\\ 
    0\\
    \vdots
    \end{pmatrix}
    \label{eq:conductance_matrix_equation}$$ Where $\mathbf{G}$ is the
conductance matrix $$\mathbf{G} = 
    \begin{pmatrix}
    \Sigma_{k\ne 1}G_{1k} &-G_{12}  &\cdots  &-G_{1N} \\ 
    -G_{21} &\Sigma_{k\ne 1}G_{2k} &\cdots  &-G_{2N} \\ 
    \vdots &\vdots  &\ddots  & \vdots\\ 
    -G_{N1} &-G_{N2}  &\cdots  &\Sigma_{k\ne N}G_{Nk} 
    \end{pmatrix}
    \label{eq:conductance_matrix}$$

For $Y_r = 0$,
Eq [\[eq:conductance\_matrix\_equation\]](#eq:conductance_matrix_equation){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:conductance_matrix_equation"} has a solution for only
specific values of $\omega = \zeta_m$. These are the values which make
the conductance matrix singular, i.e. which make its determinant zero
$$\text{Det}\left[\mathbf{G}(\zeta_m)\right] = 0
    \label{eq:det}$$ The determinant is a polynomial in $\omega$, so the
problem of finding $\zeta_m = \omega_m+i\kappa_m/2$ reduces to finding
the roots of this polynomial. Note that plugging $\zeta_m$ into the
frequency domain expression for the node voltages yields
$V_k(\zeta_m)e^{i\omega_mt}e^{-\kappa_mt/2}$, such that the energy
$\propto v_k(t)^*v_k(t) \propto e^{-\kappa_mt}$ decays at a rate
$\kappa_m$, which explains the division by two in the expression of
$\zeta_m$. Also note, that we would have obtained equation
Eq. ([\[eq:det\]](#eq:det){reference-type="ref" reference="eq:det"})
regardless of the choice of reference element.

### Algorithm

We now describe the algorithm used to determine the solutions
$\zeta_m = \omega_m+i\kappa_m/2$ of
Eq. [\[eq:det\]](#eq:det){reference-type="ref" reference="eq:det"}. As
an example, we consider the circuit of
Fig. [\[fig:f\_finder\_example\]](#fig:f_finder_example){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:f_finder_example"}(a) that a user would have built with
the GUI.

![ **Example circuit to illustrate the mode frequency finder
algorithm.** **(a)** Example of a circuit built through the GUI by a
user. **(b)** Application of the first step of the algorithm which
removes the wires and grounds to obtain a minimal number of nodes
without removing any components. ](figures/fig_f_finder_example.pdf)

[\[fig:f\_finder\_example\]]{#fig:f_finder_example
label="fig:f_finder_example"}

The algorithm is as follows

1.  Eliminate wires and grounds. In this case, nodes $N_0,N_5$ would be
    grouped under a single node labeled 0 and nodes $N_1,N_2,N_3$ would
    be grouped under node 1, we label node $N_4$ node 2, as shown in
    Fig. [\[fig:f\_finder\_example\]](#fig:f_finder_example){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:f_finder_example"}(b).

2.  Compute the un-grounded conductance matrix. For each component
    present between the different couples of nodes, we append the
    conductance matrix with the components conductance. The matrix is
    then multiplied by $\omega$ such that all components are polynomials
    in $\omega$, ensuring that the determinant is also a polynomial. In
    this example, the matrix is $$\begin{pmatrix}
            iC\omega^2+1/iL & -iC\omega^2  & -1/iL  \\
            -iC\omega^2 &iC\omega^2+\omega/R  &-\omega/R  \\
             -1/iL &-\omega/R  &1/iL +\omega/R
            \end{pmatrix}$$

3.  Choose a ground node. The node which has a corresponding column with
    the most components is chosen as the ground node (to reduce
    computation time). These rows and columns are erased from the
    matrix, yielding the final form of the conductance matrix
    $$\mathbf{G}=
            \begin{pmatrix}
            iC\omega^2+\omega/R  &-\omega/R  \\
            -\omega/R  &1/iL +\omega/R
            \end{pmatrix}$$

4.  Compute the determinant. Even if the capacitance, inductance and
    resistance were specified numerically, the conductance matrix would
    still be a function of the symbolic variable $\omega$. We thus rely
    on a symbolic Berkowitz determinant calculation
    algorithm [@berkowitz1984computing; @kerber2009division] implemented
    in the Sympy library through the `berkowitz_det` function. In this
    example, one would obtain
    $$\text{Det}[\mathbf{G}] = LC\omega^2-iRC\omega -1\ .$$

5.  Find the roots of the polynomial. Whilst the above steps have to be
    performed only once for a given circuit, this one should be
    performed each time the user edits the value of a component. The
    root-finding is divided in the following steps as prescribed by
    Ref. [@press2007numerical]. Diagonalize the polynomials companion
    matrix [@horn1985cr] to obtain an exhaustive list of all roots of
    the polynomial. This is implemented in the NumPy library through the
    `roots` function. Refine the precision of the roots using multiple
    iterations of Halley's gradient based root
    finder [@press2007numerical] until iterations do not improve the
    root value beyond a predefined tolerance given by the `Qcircuit`
    argument `root_relative_tolerance`. The maximum number of iterations
    that may be carried out is determined by the `Qcircuit` argument
    `root_max_iterations`. If the imaginary part relative to the real
    part of the root is lower than the relative tolerance, the imaginary
    part will be set to zero. The relative tolerance thus sets the
    highest quality factor that QuCAT can detect. Remove identical roots
    (equal up to the relative tolerance), roots with negative imaginary
    or real parts, 0-frequency roots, roots for which $Y_l'(\omega_m)<0$
    for all $l$, where $Y_l$ is the admittance evaluated at the nodes of
    an inductive element $l$, and roots for which $Q_m<$
    `Qcircuit.Q_min`. The user is warned of a root being discarded when
    one of these cases is unexpected.

The roots $\zeta_m$ obtained through this algorithm are accessed through
the method `eigenfrequencies` which returns the oscillatory frequency in
Hertz of all the modes ${\text{Re}[\zeta_m]/2\pi}$ or `loss_rates` which
returns ${2\text{Im}[\zeta_m]/2\pi}$.

Derivative of the admittance {#sec:methods_network_dY}
----------------------------

The zero-point fluctuations in phase $\varphi_{\text{zpf},m,r}$ for each
mode $m$ across a reference junction $r$ is the starting point to
computing a Hamiltonian for the non-linear potential of the Junctions.
As expressed in Eq. ([\[eq:zpf\]](#eq:zpf){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:zpf"}), this quantity depends on the derivative $Y_r'$ of
the admittance $Y_r$ calculated at the nodes of the reference element.
In this section we first cover the algorithm used to obtain the
admittance at the nodes of an arbitrary component. From this admittance
we then describe the method to obtain the derivative of the admittance
on which $\varphi_{\text{zpf},m,r}$ depends Finally we describe how to
choose a (mode-dependent) reference element.

### Computing the admittance

Here we describe a method to compute the admittance of a network between
two arbitrary nodes. We will continue using the example circuit of
Fig. [\[fig:f\_finder\_example\]](#fig:f_finder_example){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:f_finder_example"}, assuming we want to compute the
admittance at the nodes of the inductor.

1.  Eliminate wires and grounds as in the resonance finding algorithm,
    nodes $N_0,N_5$ would be grouped under a single node labeled 0 and
    nodes $N_1,N_2,N_3$ would be grouped under node 1, we label node
    $N_4$ node 2. We thus obtain
    Fig. [\[fig:Y\_computation\_example\]](#fig:Y_computation_example){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:Y_computation_example"}(a)

2.  Group parallel connections. Group all components connected in
    parallel as a single "admittance component\" equal to the sum of
    admittances of its parts. In this way two nodes are either
    disconnected, connected by a single inductor, capacitor, junction or
    resistor, or connected by a single "admittance component\".

3.  Reduce the network through star-mesh transformations. Excluding the
    nodes across which we want to evaluate the admittance, we utilize
    the star-mesh transformation described in
    Fig. [\[fig:star\_mesh\]](#fig:star_mesh){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:star_mesh"} to reduce the number of nodes in the
    network to two. If following a star-mesh transformation, two
    components are found in parallel, they are grouped under a single
    "admittance component\" as described previously. For a node
    connected to more than 3 other nodes the star-mesh transformation
    will increase the total number of components in the circuit. So we
    start with the least-connected nodes to maintain the total number of
    components in the network to a minimum. In this example, we want to
    keep nodes 0 and 2, but remove node 1, a start-mesh transform leads
    to the circuit of
    Fig. [\[fig:Y\_computation\_example\]](#fig:Y_computation_example){reference-type="ref"
    reference="fig:Y_computation_example"}(b) then grouping parallel
    componnets leads to (c).

4.  The admittance is that of the remaining "admittance component\" once
    the network has been completely reduced to two nodes.

The symbolic variables at this stage (Sympy `Symbols`) are $\omega$, and
the variables corresponding to any component with un-specified values.

![ **Star-mesh transform.** A node $N$ connected to nodes $A,B,C,..$
through admittances $Y_A,Y_B,...$ can be eliminated if we interconnect
nodes $A,B,C,..$ with impedances $Y_{AB},Y_{AC},Y_{BC},...$ given by
$Y_{XY} = Y_XY_Y/\sum_MY_M$. We show the 5 node case, the initial
network on the left is called the "star\", which is then transformed to
the "mesh\" on the right, reducing the total number of nodes by 1.
](figures/fig_star_mesh.pdf){width="50%"}

[\[fig:star\_mesh\]]{#fig:star_mesh label="fig:star_mesh"}

![ **Example to illustrate the admittance calculation algorithm.**
**(a)** Example of a circuit built through the GUI by a user, after
removal of all wires and grounds. **(b)** Application of the star-mesh
transformation to remove node 1. **(c)** After each application of the
star-mesh transformation, parallel connections are grouped together.
Only the two nodes across which we want to compute the admittance
remain, the admittance is that of the remaining "admittance component\".
](figures/fig_Y_computation_example.pdf)

[\[fig:Y\_computation\_example\]]{#fig:Y_computation_example
label="fig:Y_computation_example"}

### Differentiating the admittance

The expression for the admittance obtained from the above algorithm will
necessarily be in the form of multiple multiplication, divisions or
additions of the admittance of capacitors, inductors or resistors. It is
thus possible to transform $Y$ to a rational function of $\omega$
$$Y(\omega) = \frac{P(\omega)}{Q(\omega)} = \frac{p_0+p_1\omega+p_2\omega^2+...}{q_0+q_1\omega+q_2\omega^2+...}$$
with the sympy function `together`. It is then easy to symbolically
determine the derivative of Y, ready to be evaluated at $\zeta_m$ once
the coefficients $p_i$ and $q_i$ have been extracted $$\begin{split}
    Y'(\zeta_m) &= \left(P'(\zeta_m)Q(\zeta_m) -P(\zeta_m)Q'(\zeta_m)\right)/Q(\zeta_m)^2\\
      &=(p_1+2p_2\zeta_m+...)/(q_0+q_1\zeta_m+...)\ ,
\end{split}$$ taking advantage of the property
$P(\zeta_m)\propto Y(\zeta_m)=0$.

### Choice of reference element

For each mode $m$, we use as reference element $r$ the inductor or
junction which maximizes $\varphi_{\text{zpf},m,r}$ as specified by
Eq. [\[eq:zpf\]](#eq:zpf){reference-type="ref" reference="eq:zpf"}. This
corresponds to the element where the phase fluctuations are majoritarily
located. We find that doing so considerably increases the success of
evaluating $Y'(\omega_m)$. As an example, we plot in
Fig. [\[fig:best\_ref\_elt\]](#fig:best_ref_elt){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:best_ref_elt"} the zero-point fluctuations in phase
$\varphi_{\text{zpf},m,r}$ of the transmon-like mode, calculated for the
circuit of Fig. [\[fig:1\]](#fig:1){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:1"}, with the junction or inductor as reference element.
What we find is that if the coupling capacitor becomes too small,
resulting in modes which are nearly totally localized in either inductor
or junction, choosing the wrong reference element combined with
numerical inaccuracies leads to unreliable values of
$\varphi_{\text{zpf},m,r}$.

![ **Impact of the choice of reference element.** **(a)** Schematic of
the circuit used in this example. We have used a 100 fF capacitances, a
10 nH inductor and a 8 nH Josephson inductance, we will vary the
coupling capacitance. The zero-point fluctuations in phase
$\varphi_{\text{zpf},r}$ across the inductor ($r=L$) and junction
($r=J$) for most anharmonic mode are drawn on the schematic and plotted
in **(b)** for different values of the coupling capacitor $C_C$. The
phase oscillations associated with this mode are mostly located in the
junction, so as the coupling capacitor is lowered, the amplitude of
phase oscillations diminishes in the inductor. Below $C_C\sim 10^{-5}$
fF, numerical accuracies lead to unreliable values of the phase
fluctuations in the inductor. This results in the anharmonicity of the
qubit-like mode $A_q$, plotted in **(c)**, to be incorrectly estimated
if the inductor is chosen as a reference element and the anharmonicity
is computed using
Eq. ([\[eq:phi\_j\_from\_phi\_r\]](#eq:phi_j_from_phi_r){reference-type="ref"
reference="eq:phi_j_from_phi_r"}). ](figures/fig_best_ref_elt.pdf)

[\[fig:best\_ref\_elt\]]{#fig:best_ref_elt label="fig:best_ref_elt"}

Transfer functions {#sec:methods_network_transfer}
------------------

In this section, we describe the method used to determine the transfer
function $T_{jr}$ between a junction $j$ and the reference junction $r$.
This quantity can be computed from the ABCD
matrix [@pozar2009microwave]. The ABCD matrix relates the voltages and
currents in a two port network $$\begin{pmatrix}
    V_r \\
    I_r
    \end{pmatrix}=
    \begin{pmatrix}
    A&B \\
    C&D
    \end{pmatrix}
    \begin{pmatrix}
    V_j\\
    I_j\\
    \end{pmatrix}$$ where the convention for current direction is
described in
Fig. [\[fig:two\_port\_network\]](#fig:two_port_network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:two_port_network"}.

![ **Visual summary of the notations and properties of the ABCD matrix
applied to the calculation of $T_{rj}$.** The transfer function
$T_{rj} = 1/A$ is the inverse of the first coefficient of the ABCD
matrix which relates the voltages and currents on either end of a
network. These currents and voltages are defined as shown above, with
the reference junction on the left and junction $j$ on the right.
Currents are defined as entering and exciting on the left and right
respectively. If the circuit is constituted of a cascade of two port
sub-networks, the product of the sub-network ABCD matrices are equal to
the ABCD matrix of the total network.
](figures/fig_two_port_network.pdf)

[\[fig:two\_port\_network\]]{#fig:two_port_network
label="fig:two_port_network"}

By constructing the network as in
Fig. [\[fig:two\_port\_network\]](#fig:two_port_network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:two_port_network"}, with the reference junction on the
left and junction $j$ on the right, the transfer function is given by
$$T_{jr}(\omega) = \frac{V_j(\omega)}{V_r(\omega)} = \frac{1}{A}$$

To determine $A$, we first reduce the circuit using star-mesh
transformations (see
Fig.[\[fig:star\_mesh\]](#fig:star_mesh){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:star_mesh"}), and group parallel connections as described
in the previous section, until only the nodes of junctions $r$ and $j$
are left. If the junctions initially shared a node, the resulting
circuit will be equivalent to the network shown in
Fig.[\[fig:network\]](#fig:network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:network"} (a). In this case,
$$A = \left(1+\frac{Y_p}{Y_a}\right)\ .$$ If the junctions do not share
nodes, the resulting circuit will be equivalent to the network shown in
Fig.[\[fig:network\]](#fig:network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:network"}(b), where some admittances may be equal to $0$
to represent open circuits. To compute the ABCD matrix of this resulting
circuit, we make use of the property illustrated in
Fig. [\[fig:two\_port\_network\]](#fig:two_port_network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:two_port_network"}: the ABCD matrix of a cascade
connection of two-port networks is equal to the product of the ABCD
matrices of the individual networks. We first determine the $ABCD$
matrix of three parts of the network (separated by dashed line in
Fig.[\[fig:network\]](#fig:network){reference-type="ref"
reference="fig:network"}) such that the $ABCD$ matrix of the total
network reads $$\begin{bmatrix}
    A & B   \\
    C & D  \\
\end{bmatrix} = 
\begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 0   \\
    Y_r & 1  \\
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}
    \tilde A  & \tilde B   \\
    \tilde C & \tilde D  \\
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}
    1 & 0   \\
    Y_j & 1  \\
\end{bmatrix}\ .$$ $$A = \tilde A+\tilde B Y_j\ ,$$ where the $A$ and
$B$ coefficients of the middle part of the network are $$\begin{split}
    \tilde A&=(Y_a + Y_b)(Y_c + Y_d)/(Y_a Y_d-Y_b Y_c)\\
    \tilde B&=(Y_a + Y_b + Y_c + Y_d)/(Y_a Y_d-Y_b Y_c)\ .
\end{split}$$ The ABCD matrix for the middle part of the circuit is
derived in Sec. 10.11 of Ref. [@arshad2010network], and the ABCD
matrices for the circuits on either sides are provided in
Ref. [@pozar2009microwave].

![ **Networks after star-mesh reduction.** The two non-trivial
situations reached after applying star-mesh transformations to a network
to obtain $T_{rj}$.
[]{label="fig:network"}](figures/fig_network.pdf){#fig:network
width="50%"}

This method is also applied to calculate the transfer function to
capacitors, inductors and resistors, notably to visualize the normal
mode with the `show_normal_mode` function.